Yeah, so I think that the planetary field has
become better integrated with the rest of
astronomy. And that's largely also because
planetary studies have, thanks to the amount of
money and effort, have been brought up to date. You
have to realize that back in the 30s and 40s, when
planetary studies were at their lowest ebb, The
techniques that were used by planetary
astronomers were very primitive. There was an
awful lot of what was called physical study of
planets, which was taking pictures of them and
trying to understand things from just direct
photographs, which is not very important and not
very useful. With perhaps different filters?
That's right. A lot of stuff like tracking dust
storms on Mars. There's still a certain amount of
tracking dust storms on Mars that goes on, but
that's kind of all there was in those days. There
were a few feeble efforts by people to understand
the markings on them. You have to realize, when I
got into this business, there was a huge
controversy over the nature of the lunar craters.
There were still people who wanted lunar craters
and volcanoes. Kuiper was one of the first people
who pointed out that lunar craters were different
from lunar volcanoes and showed that these things
that people would call them were genuine
volcanoes like the volcanoes in Hawaii. and
pointed that out as a result of compiling the
pictures for the photographic data. And so there
was a long period of techniques that were being
used by mainline astronomers, particularly
spectroscopy, simply weren't being applied to
planets. And after planetary spectroscopy got
revived, that quickly showed the need for more
laboratory spectroscopy, more molecular
things. molecular spectra have taken over an
overriding importance in the Earth's atmosphere
because of pollutant detection. So the portfolio
has become, well, I guess that's the other
connection, that the whole business of
comparative planetology, of comparing both the
solid bodies in the atmosphere of other planets
with that of the Earth, has made the field a great
deal more respectable as well as more
well-funded. And so this has again brought a more
into the mainstream of science and left a little
peripheral interest. Where do you think if there
was never been a NASA? Well, for there never to have
been a NASA, there would never have had to be a
Sputnik. And for there never to have been a
Sputnik, I mean, this is really one of these things
that's tied in with the current war and the use of
ICBMs and rockets for military purposes. There's
a whole broad context there that must be tied
together. Do you think that if there had not been
that,
they seem willing to do it right now, this year?
Yeah, right. Hmm.
Well, the Air Force certainly was sponsoring a lot
of early studies and things that could be done.
Now, for instance, to give you some notion, again,
of a Cold War tie-in, when I had, I guess I hadn't
even gotten my Ph.D. yet. I was a senior graduate
student at Harvard. I was asked by one of the
companies around 128, I guess it was somebody out
at Lincoln,
who write a study of what could be done with a
100-inch pulse depth of orbit. And this must have
been around 1969 or 60. And, of course,
unbeknownst to me at the time, the Earth Force was
in the process of launching 100-inch telescopes
in orbit, looking down rather than up. I was
unaware of that. Right. I was unaware of that, of
course. and was extremely skeptical at the time
that the technology permitted such a thing to be
done. They were talking about a lifetime for the
telescope of two weeks to a month, and they wanted
projects that could be done quickly in that length
of time. I gave them a rather discouraging report
because I thought that testing the optics of the
thing would take more time than that, and that it
wouldn't be possible to do an awful lot of
astronomy with such an object. And, in fact, we've
seen from the Hubble Space Telescope that, in
fact, it takes several years to test and correct
the optics that's up there. So maybe I wasn't so far
off. Well, how long did it take them to correct the
optics they needed to? About four to five years.
Yes, it took a while. Of course, they weren't as
well funded as some of these airport problems.
Planetary astronomers now have their own
journals. I would say
they're good for both.
The DPS was extremely valuable for planetary
astronomy because you have to remember that that
was a time when you couldn't get planetary papers
published in the Apt.J. And so Icarus, like
several other journals one could name, was formed
as a place for people to publish who couldn't
publish in the Apt.J.
You remember Icarus was founded by Copal, who, I
think, wrote Journey of Donorite. And Copal
founded it. Yeah, right. And then it was taken over
by Carl Sagan. And Carl, as soon as he took it over,
tried to build it up and make it a focal point for
planetary work, which he was entirely successful
in doing. And concomitant with that, there was an
effort by several people, of whom I believe Carl
was one, to firm a society devoted to planetary
studies. and to make Icarus the official journal
of that society. The other people came about after
a few years, and DPS members have had for a long time
a good price break on Icarus subscriptions.
You answered the question I had earlier, what was
planetary astronomy like when you started, and
now you didn't answer that. But do you think
planetary astronomy is part of astronomy? Of
course, yes. I always did. It seems it's a totally
different character now. When you look at the view
of the planets, in fact, even when I was still at
Harvard, I realized that everything that was
accepted proof of our planets in the old planetary
astronomy days, there was something drastically
wrong about every planet. Because when I started
teaching astronomy, I taught my students that
we're doing all these people and things all the
time. that Venus rotates in 24 hours. Or 248. Take
your pick, either one. And that the clouds were
probably made of water. Then there was the blue
haze on Mars.
Jupiter, let's see, what was there about Jupiter?
The red spot was all wrong. The red spot was all
wrong, yeah. There was a Taylor column at that
time.
There was just so much stuff then. It was just
awful. Yeah, right. In fact, if you want a good
picture of that incorrect view of planetary
astronomy, a good picture of the way it was, look at
Blanco and McCaskey's book, The Basic Physics of
the Solar System. Yeah, you'll also find that in
Russell Dugan's story. That's right, yeah. But
these two books together... really embody that
view of the solar system before the old
spacecraft, before modern technology was
brought to bear on planetary problems, and shows
you what a primitive state it was in. And I guess in a
way, even though the stellar guys sneered at
planetary stuff largely because of the
sensationalism It was
really the lack of applications of things like
spectroscopy and large telescopes and even the
existing technologies today. the planetary
problems that made planetary astronomy so
exceedingly permanent at that time? That was
something I'm certainly going to stress, which is
that some of these things could have been
uncovered long before they were. Long before they
were. Long before they were. Let's get personal
for a minute. All right. What's the best piece of
work you think you've ever done? You always have
the feeling that the paper you're working on now is
the finest thing in the world. I guess, in a way, the
best piece of work I've done, apart from what I'm
working on now, is a series of review articles I
wrote for Nat Carlton's book on pathometry. I've
got three chapters in Volume 12A of Methods of
Experimental Physics. that was published in
1975. And that's been a very influential and I
would say successful review of the subject. A less
successful but I think equally good piece of work
is the body of work I did on simulations back in the
late 60s and early 70s. Unfortunately, that has
not been influential. Well, most astronomers are
unaware of propagation through turbulence,
modern simulation theory, ceiling, and all that
stuff that's well understood by optical
physicists, communication engineers,
oceanographers, and many other people in fields
dealing with propagation through turbulence.
Astronomers, unfortunately, were the first
people into this field of turbulent propagation,
and they fossilized a lot of wrong notions very
early. In particular, the notion that there are
independent bright and dark factors argument can
be used to estimate the amplitude of simulation.
That argument was recently published last year,
most recently published last year in solar
physics, at least 30 years after it was known to be
wrong. And I am continually discouraged at how to
solve this problem of getting astronomers
educated. The theory is not all that difficult,
but it seems to be one we refuse to learn. because
the textbooks are in other fields. It's the
not-invented-here business. And they simply
won't read books written by people who are not a
scholar. Do you have any misfires? Misfires? You
mean real boo-boos? Yes. Sentin bands. Sentin
bands. I guess the biggest sentin band thing I came
up with was when I suggested there might be carbon
disulfide on Venus. And a close companion to that
was my suggestion that the lower atmosphere of
Venus might contain a large amount of sulfur.
Those are probably my worst two pieces of work. Any
gripes or compliments about the way the USA's
handled science and, of course, scientific
research grants in particular in the past? Yeah,
let me think about this for a second. Turn off the
tape. OK. I think NASA got off on the wrong foot by
being created overnight in a rush. The result was
it was staffed with people who were available. I
know there were people who were borrowed from
other agencies in the Washington area. There were
a lot of non-astronomers put in. There were too few
people at the start that had the scientific
expertise to guide the agency
wisely. That was the error in the beginning. After
a few years, they began getting some scientists
involved. Unfortunately, as the thing grew, it
became more and more bureaucratic, and that
repelled more and more scientists, so that now
it's exceedingly difficult to get anybody with
good scientific credentials to help NASA
headquarters, or for that matter, any other of
these Washington bureaucracies. And again, the
result is that there's not enough scientific
input to the policy making.
There's entirely too much bureaucracy that has
been shoveled onto the individual scientists,
the grant receivers, who have worked through the
development of these large research
contract-handling organizations that are
connected with universities. The result is that
far too much money is going in the overhead and not
enough in the science. That's another problem.
There's yet another problem in NASA, which I have
seen close up, and that is that although they have
continually patted themselves on the back for
their amount of general expertise I've actually
heard NASA people say that NASA's greatest
contribution was learning how to manage these
enormously complicated technical projects. In
fact, they have not learned how to manage these
enormously complicated technical projects.
Every one of them that I've seen has been done
differently. They always discover that there
were serious flaws in the previous project, so
they vow to do the next one differently, and they
make a whole new set of mistakes the second time
around. My favorite example of horror story is the
thing that got me out of the Viking lander camera
team. I was going to these meetings every two weeks
in various parts of the country to discuss
progress on the cameras. And at one of these
meetings, a guy came up to me and said, hey, we got a
problem. We've just realized that the radio
transmitter that sits on the back of the lander is
gold coated for thermal control. And we're
worried that the sun will reflect off of this shiny
gold coating into the camera, and the camera will
be blinded. And I said, come on. That's a
ridiculous worry. The sun would have to be just in
the right orientation, just the right height
above the horizon. Even if the sun did reflect off
of the thing into the camera, it's a scanning
system. The image of the sun is only going to be on
the detector for a tenth of a millisecond. You can
forget about it. You know, it's a solid state
detector. You can't hurt it. He said, you mean we
don't have to paint it brown? And I said, that's
right. And he said, you've just saved us $30,000.
And it turned out that the $30,000 was not $30,000
worth of brown paint. And it was not $30,000 worth
of testing in thermal vacuum chamber. It was
$30,000 that it cost to print and mail out that
boiler plate thing two inches thick every time
they made a change in the specification. So if they
changed the line from shall be gold-coated to
shall be painted brown, that was $30,000 down the
drain. That kind of was the last straw for me.
All
right. We've done a lot of work from the ground and
from spacecraft, and no trace of life or anything
approaching it anywhere else in the solar system
except Earth. Yep. How much do you think this has
hurt funding? A lot? None at all? Gee, I don't know
if it's made any difference or not. Unless
walking, talking life were discovered
somewhere. You know, if, for example, the lichens
that had been expected on Mars by some people had
actually been discovered on Mars. I don't think
that would have done much. You've got to realize
that there's something like 10% of the population
that thinks the moon landings were fake. They
don't believe any of this stuff anyway. People in
general are pretty ignorant of science,
apparently increasingly more so as time goes on.
And I think that unless obviously intelligent
life that could compete with us on our own level had
been discovered, I don't think it would have made
any ripple in the public. It would have made a
ripple in the academic community, to be sure. But
I'm not sure that it would have had a big impact on
funding of NASA. You have to realize there might
also have been a backlash from the
fundamentalists against this and demanding that
this kind of stuff be shut off. So I think, on
average, it probably made no difference
whatsoever. What's the state of planetary
astronomy today? Oh, shrinking like mad.
Shrinking like mad. The NASA budget is rapidly
being cut. I read not long ago that 70% of the
astronomers in this country, not just planetary,
but all astronomers in this country are supported
by NASA. It's creating an employment crisis. I
think what's going to happen is that NASA will
shrink back to something closely resembling the
old NACA that preceded it, the National Advisory
Committee on Aeronautics. I think it will become
an aeronautical engineering research
organization, as it was originally, and that the
space business will eventually peter out and come
to an end, either for lack of funding or because the
accumulation of debris in orbit makes it
impractical to launch things into space. into
lower Earth orbit anymore. The Air Force seems
ready, willing, and able to do space exploration.
Do you think they'll make the change that they can
stand on? They already are, of course. Well, I
don't know. I think I'm not plugged into that
community, so I can't say how eager they are to get
into that kind of stuff. They may pick up a little of
it. I can't... You see, the Air Force, probably
even more than NASA, is interested in flying
people around. I think even more than NASA, they
regard that as their primary mission. And so I
think it's unlikely that the Air Force will make it
go in place of NASA. If the Air Force should take on
the scientific one, as they did before there was
NASA, would that be good or bad or a different
performance? Well, it would be kind of like it was
before there was a NASA. It would be things more
oriented toward the Air Force's end than toward
astronomers' end. It would be better than nothing
from a scientific point of view. But again, it
would be regarded as kind of marginal funding that
a lot of people wouldn't be all that interested in
because the airport has its own access to guns.
There was this interesting business recently a
few years ago when the airport declassified their
active optics research. And it appears to me that
the reason they did that was that... You can just
barely make active optics work on astronomical
objects, which are moving across the sky very
slowly. But if you're trying to track incoming
missiles or satellites or airplanes and correct
their images, they have much higher angular rates
of motion across the sky. The problem is very much
more difficult. And I think the Air Force has
probably given up on trying to do it for their
purposes. and turn it over to the astronomers
because they realized it would do us some good and
it can't do the competition any good because it
isn't useful for military use. And get them some
good, favorable publicity. The problem is that
the hardware is still at Air Force prices if you
need a hundred and some actuators per mirror and
the actuators cost fifty thousand dollars a piece
i think the number of observatories that can
afford that is about two one of which is eso and i
don't know which is the other but maybe the cat
maybe the cat right maybe the cat um
That's a good question. I guess I would have to say
from the current state of funding that they
haven't done a good job of selling themselves to
the Congress. From the response I get from people
in the street and the interest I see in solar system
astronomy in general when I talk to people, I think
they've done a fair job of selling themselves to
the public. But the public hasn't been
sufficiently enthusiastic to communicate their
interest to their representatives in Congress.
As a result, planetary astronomy has remained
near the bottom of Congress's priority list and is
rapidly getting cut. Well, that almost
completely answers the next question, which is,
do you think that planetary astronomy has changed
in any significant way the way the public thinks
and views the research? Oh, yes. Absolutely.
Absolutely. I think the thing more than anything
else that has changed the public perception of
things is the photographs, alas, not by planetary
astronomers, but by NASA astronauts on the moon,
photographs of the Earth as taken from the moon.
That picture of Earthrise on the moon, I think, has
really sunk in on the public consciousness. And in
general, photographs of the Earth from space
have, I think, heavily leaned under the
environmental movement and the awareness that
the Earth's resources are finite. Yeah, I think
that's been a very beneficial effect. Not
entirely on the part of planetary astronomers,
but we've helped a little. There's a few technical
questions. All right. Whatever happened to the
blue haze and the blue blurry? That's a very
interesting question. DeVolkalor and I wrote a
paper that was never published on that very
subject while I was still at Harvard. IAU
symposium that was held in Marfa, Texas. We again
presented this paper. The glitch in this was
originally that one of the snipers was still alive
at Lowell, and the book lure had used the sliper
plates in gathering his raw material.
The original idea behind the Blue Haze, that there
was a large amount of opacity on Mars, was
certainly disproved by the Mariner probes. In
fact, that was one of the things that got me in
trouble with JPL administration, was that Brad
Smith and I sent a letter to science. Actually, I
signed the letter with Brad, and Brad was the guy
who mailed it in, unbeknownst to me. uh sonnet to
science showing stating that the third
observations of craters and shadows on mars by
mariner six and seven showed that there was no
large opacity at short wavelengths in these blue
photo pictures i then got chewed out by my boss at
jpl for not having this letter approved for
publication by jpl security who was the owner must
have been jerry smith i think at that time Well,
he's immortal in the Keck Telescope because he's
the chief engineer on the Keck Telescope. I think
it's the same Jerry Smith. Anyway, I got chewed out
for not having it cleared, and they insisted that I
sign, after the fact, a clearance application
form to have that letter approved for
publication.
Well, anyhow, so we know there's no blue haze, but
the odd thing is, and this is what the local study of
those old plates showed, there is an enhancement
of contrastive features that appears to be
statistically significant at small phase
angles. In the sense that in blue photographs,
things that seem to be well-known surface
features appear more often at small phase angles
than at large phase angles. And this is an effect
which is only weakly dependent on seeing and image
quality. And so it's not just due to the image being
bigger near opposition. It's a genuine
enhancement of contrast. I suppose it has to do
with the difference in phase function between
light areas and dark areas. But it's still an
enigma as to why there is this enhancement in
contrast at small phase. We still never published
our paper. Although it's plainly visible in
Schleifer's book on Mars, if you remember the big
coffee table book that Schleifer produced with, I
believe, Air Force funding, he shows essentially
the same kind of figure that we came up with. All
DeVos Miller did was reconfirm that same thing
with more statistics and more data. I think the
effect is real if there's an enhancement of
contrast in blue photographs at small phase
angles. So that's the blue clearing? That's the
so-called blue clearing, but it's not a blue
clearing. It's a blue contrast change at small
phase angles. Whatever happened to the wave of
darkening? Well, there have been various studies
of the wave of darkening. I think Chick Capon
published a number of papers on it. Who was that guy
at Lowell? Len... I just didn't keep
track of that stuff, Ron. I
can't tell you whatever became of that. Here's
something that you kept up with. What is the color
of Mars? There's a book called The Red and Green
Planet. I'll tell you, there's another book,
which if you want to see the color of Mars, shows you
pretty damn accurately the color of Mars. And
that's a nice coffee table book that was put out as a
NASA SP by Tim Mutch and the Viking Lander imaging
team. And there are some well-reproduced color
pictures in there showing the best
reconstructions I know of of the color of Mars.
They... It was the only spacecraft experiment on
which genuine colorimetry was done. They
determined the Munsell specifications for
various features in the landscape, rocks, soil,
sky, and whatnot. And that stuff was published in
detail in JGR and then was published in a more
informal fashion without the Munsell
specifications. in this caucus table book called
The Martian Landscape. And if you want to see what
color Mars is, it's well shown in The Martian
Landscape. If you look up the MUNCEL
specifications and find out the names that the
National Bureau of Standards attached to those
colors, they are yellowish brown, various kinds
of yellowish brown. It's about the color of an old
rusty nail. So the brighter is on Mars, the darker
is on Mars. Brighter, darker. Yellowish brown.
Exactly.
Whatever happened to the ashen light on Venus? Are
you familiar with that? Yeah, the ashen light.
Well, there's a curious follow-up to the ashen
light, you see, and that's this infrared ashen
light that has been discovered by David Allen and
investigated further by David Crisp. The thermal
radiation from the lower atmosphere that leaks
out through the windows between the water and CO2
bands. There is genuine radiation. It probably is
not visible. Probably all the stuff that was
reported as ashen light by the visual observer is
purely optical illusion effect. But there is this
funny successor to the ashen light in the near
infrared that's genuine and has been studied.